your concept of yourself is built out of
the narratives that we create out of our
experience and so if you want to change
how you feel about yourself you have to
start peeling back those layers of
narrative
your income your impact your
relationship with creativity
productivity in the world
it all comes down to your relationship
with yourself
a simple moment
in the morning where you set an
intention it impacts your confidence it
impacts your mood all day long just that
simple moment
people's admiration people's gratitude
towards you will never fill you up it's
your own it's your own inside
it's not a matter of changing the
environment it's changing myself
[Music]
how do we begin to establish what we
think is good what does it mean to be
better
and you come to this from an ethical
place and i know that you don't want to
like direct people too much and say
believe this or whatever but what are
some jumping off points like is it to go
read philosophy you said that you
approach life as a buddhist like yeah
how can people begin to build that
framework for themselves because what
what i'm really trying to get to is i
feel like you have to have a base belief
of some kind upon which things stack but
i don't think people think about that
yes and
even just pointing them in a direction
of how to start begin defining that for
themselves i think would be super
helpful yeah so for me i found that
i talk about kant in the book
i was very inspired by kant's moral
philosophy basically he has this
principle called the formula of humanity
which is essentially
it's so simple but it kind of explains
everything he says that
always act in such a way that you never
merely treat people a person as a means
but always as an end
and what that means is like
don't use people you know like anything
you do
uh
the whole point of what you do what you
do like the end goal of what you do
should always be a person whether it's
yourself or somebody else so like if
you're like kind of misleading somebody
or just saying something to somebody
just to get them to like i don't know
give you some money or
you know make them like you a little bit
um
you know under that principle like
that's that is not growth that is not
success um any basic stuff like lying
cheating stealing like all of those are
examples of using people as a means to
some other end rather than treating the
person as an end
of themselves
um so i i when i came across that
principle it just
for me it kind of blew me back on just
how universal and
powerful and useful it was
um
because in and you know i spent a lot of
time writing about dating and
relationships and
and i
i was coming from a place where i you
know my philosophy around relationships
was always like the thing that screws
relationships up is treating people as a
means is being transactional in your
relationships um
and so when i found that con stuff i was
like
damn this dude gets it
how do you advise is probably a better
way to ask it how do you advise people
to go on that journey like it feels like
not the sum total of what you're trying
to accomplish because it's pretty clear
that
you're you're very efficient at
alleviating immediate pain
but in terms of helping people find that
spiritual awakening
what does that pursuit look like how do
people
begin or how do they recognize markers
on the path how do they know they're
making progress
a beginning
is
who we choose
to spend time with
there's a simple analogy if you take an
iron rod and put it in fire and keep it
there a little
it becomes red and hot like fire
and if if you touch that rod it's the
same as touching fire
and if you put the same rod in ice and
keep it there then it becomes as cold as
ice
so what we associate with
we so much become
influenced by that
and we see throughout the ages people's
spiritual awakening
is due to circumstances of life
where we feel
a need for something
deeper
something beyond
just all the
external experiences i'm having
there must be something more to life
than this
in india i'm in villages with very
simple poor people
and i'm also with millionaires and
billionaires and i really don't see too
much difference because if a person
doesn't find satisfaction
in their own hearts and in the purpose
of their life
they're not going to be happy people
whatever they have or whatever they
don't have
because the real treasure is
within ourselves
so
when we feel that need
when we feel that
that purpose
in our life to find something deeper
something beyond
then we connect with people who can
inspire
enlighten us
to make that connection
the human brain
has a phenomenon called transient
hypofrontality the neocortex as you know
it's the the seed of thinking it's our
monkey mind it's all the chattering it's
the stuff that says tom you can't do it
robin you can't do it what would they
think what if i fail what if i get
laughed at that's all the neocortex is
the crown jewel of brain development not
our primitive brain crown jewel
but there's no genius in there now
here's what i mean
when we get away from distraction
and we find our menlo park or we go work
in a quiet place
and we get lost
the neocortex actually shuts down and
that's why it's called transient typo
frontality for a short period of time
our thinking shuts down the whole model
is in the book
and we actually go from brain waves at
beta
down to alpha
down to theta and maybe even delta
and we stop thinking we go into flow
in other words the advanced minds of the
world the great geniuses galileo davinci
steve jobs
they weren't in the neocortex they got
away from the world for bursts of time
which allowed them to access the human
capability we all have to get into flow
state and access
insights that they went out in the world
and then executed on with a world-class
team which totally changed the game
i wonder if i can use this
54321 thing to get control
of my
thought patterns not my behavior
patterns my thought patterns
yes you can
so we're gonna we're gonna build this
conversation because i want to start
with something we can all uh relate to
and that is how do you stop worrying
and how do you stop listening to
self-doubt
this is how you're going to do it so all
day long
you're going to have moments where your
thoughts drift and i use that word
on purpose because for me there is a
physical sensation when you start to use
the five-second rule and you start to
wake up not only on time in the morning
but you wake up to your life and the
opportunities in your life
there's your thoughts drift like you'll
just be hanging out with your friends
and then suddenly you're like i'm not
sure that that person likes me anymore
you know i haven't heard from my kids
lately i wonder if they're dead or you
know oh you know as a check like you
just start worrying about stuff why
because it's a habit
because when you're not paying attention
your brain shifts from you being a
decision maker and paying attention to
you just kind of spinning things on
autopilot and one of your habits is
worrying
the second you wake up and you notice
holy cow i'm talking some negative
garbage to myself right now five four
three two one
you've just shifted the part of the
brain that you're using you've shifted
from the basal ganglia which is where
your habit loops are spinning and you've
awakened your prefrontal cortex
you've also interrupted that pattern
now what you're going to do because your
mind is actually ready
to receive a different thought because
of the counting
now you can put in an anchor thought
like if you have a mantra if you've got
a vision about the way that your
business is going to turn out in five
years if you just have a thought that
makes you really happy and proud insert
that now why does this work
it works because of the counting
and i'm not kidding
we know based on research the positive
thinking alone not effective
in some instances trying to force
yourself to think positive can actually
make the worries worse
why well the reason why is because it's
really hard to just change the channel
what we have to do first is basically
interrupt it and turn off the tv and
then turn it back on
with the prefrontal cortex awakened so
the counting is essential and so you can
start using this today you catch
yourself
talking garbage to yourself because we
all know if i were to put a speaker on
your head and broadcast if you would be
sitting here in the audience you'd be in
an insane asylum because the crap that
you say to yourself is insane
and the problem is we listen to it
you'll be you'll be in a sales meeting
and you'll be undermining yourself
they're not going to buy oh my gosh i'm
in trouble you're not even present 54321
switch it back
get back to that vision that you have
about toasting your success or this
customer being really happy or you being
proud of yourself whatever that vision
may be you can control your thoughts and
this is not just us talking about it
this is a tool that you can use you have
a relationship with yourself the way
that you have with somebody else yeah
which is
really fascinating tell me about that
like what do you mean by that and and
then like the whole notion of i forget
the exact word you used but you said i
approached this like a buddhist the self
is an illusion i don't think you said
that but it was like it made me feel
that way yes yes yes i i said it's an
arbitrary construct which yeah illusion
i think uh
so our relationship with ourselves like
essentially what
self-esteem is or self-worth is
basically let me back up for a second
the feeling brain so the thinking brain
thinks in terms of like logic cause and
effect correlations things like that the
feeling brain thinks in terms of
importance
um it thinks in terms of values so
some things are very valuable and worthy
of our of being pursued and other things
are very
very
not valuable and they're you they should
be avoided
um
and the feeling brain
kind of designates
you know almost a value score for
everything every experience every
potential experience that we we can
consider
including ourselves so
our
idea of what our self is is just another
idea the same way
you know
being
living in new york is an idea and i
there is a certain value i place on that
and that that idea has logical
connections to all sorts of things that
who i am as mark manson is simply a
constructed idea in my mind and as a
constructed idea my feeling brain has
either positive or negative
valuations and feelings for for
mark manson um
when people have a low valuation of
themselves when they have when their
feeling brain thinks that their identity
is not valuable and and have negative
emotions about it uh we call that low
self-esteem and when
our the idea of ourself
our feeling brain has a high valuation
of it and has positive feelings for it
we call that high self-esteem and so a
lot of like therapeutic work for many
decades
was kind of almost obsessed of like just
trying to get people people's this
relationship between your feeling brain
and your conception of your identity to
get it to get the needle to move from
negative to positive um
because there are all sorts of you know
positive
repercussions of that
but ultimately
the your your concept of yourself is
built out of
um the narratives that we create out of
our experience so all of the experiences
that i've had or all the experiences
that you have you know your idea of tom
is just this
vast collection of
uh
narratives that you've constructed
around your own experiences and it's
layer on top of layer on top of layer on
top of layer and your feeling brain has
a certain
you know valence for those experiences
and so if you want to change how you
feel about yourself you have to start
peeling back those layers of narrative
and start getting down into the deepest
earliest ones because those are often
the most impactful and influential
hope you enjoy this episode brought to
you by our sponsors at betterhelp go to
betterhelp.com
impact to get 10 off your first month
enjoy the episode
what would you say are the three if
somebody wants to be a truly effective
leader what are three traits that they
should cultivate in themselves
know yourself i mean jack welch of
general electric said it really well do
um
don't lose yourself on the way to the
top warren buffett said
they'll never be a better you than you
so great leaders again it's those four
interior empires working on yourself
knowing
what what you want to stand for knowing
what you once said about you on the last
hour for your last day knowing your core
values your top five core values knowing
those knowing your weaknesses knowing
your strengths i mean a lot of
leadership talk isn't about that but
starting with your character and your
self-identity that is really important
for a leader i'd say the second thing
for a leader
would be
well
getting big things done you know you
mentioned it in the introduction is like
ferocious like a warrior when it comes
to execution like great leadership is
less talk and more do
you know i it doesn't really matter what
the chatter i mean it's all about
execution implementation and
and application so they get things done
and we live in a world where
you know we pull out the phone people
i'm going to get this done and i'm going
to get that done we say to people i'll
send you a book it doesn't get done even
worse
it's we lose self respect from the
promises we make to ourselves that we
break that's where it all starts like
it's so you know this it's so important
your your income your impact your
relationship with creativity
productivity in the world
it all comes down to your relationship
with yourself
so that would be the second thing about
leadership it's like execution and don't
break promises
how do you help people not begin to
erode their self-confidence
and and maybe the right place to start
with that is where does self-confidence
come from right which is important
because there's no relationship between
that and eroding your self-confidence in
other words self-confidence is really
self-trust so the first thing is the
people i know that are really happy are
very self-aware in fact the best
entrepreneurs i know are very self-aware
they're aware of their shortcomings
right they want to improve them they
want to get to the next version of
themselves all the time and so for me
self-confidence comes because i didn't
have it and i think anytime you meet
somebody like yourself or myself who
might now appear self-confident it's
because i really had to find tools and
resources because i was so insecure and
shy and introverted so i had to find
techniques and resources to build that
up in me and for me it's very simple
it's the promises that i keep to myself
if i have a habit over and over
beginning to stack one on top of the
other of keeping promises i make to me
not other people in other words the
minute you begin to get external in your
life worrying about what other people
think about you right you've you've lost
all control you and it never fills you
up and people's admiration people's
gratitude towards you will never fill
you up it's your own it's your own
inside and so for me self-confidence
comes from keeping the promises i make
to myself and the other part of it is
being aware i'm doing it in other words
most people don't give themselves enough
credit all the time they're very aware
of these 20 things and not aware of the
80 right and that's why the dosage is so
important too you've nailed it it should
be 80 20 right because people get
addicted to this i'm not good at this
people don't like this about me i don't
feel good instead of focusing on the 80
and stacking up wow i did eat what i
said i was going to today i did get up
when i said i was going to i made the
amount of phone calls i treated people
in such a way i promised myself it's not
just doing those things it's rewarding
it's being aware of it and stacking that
up when i work with athletes
the successful athletes i work with when
they're in a slump
it's never that they can't hit a ball
anymore or make a shot or swing a golf
club they've lost their self-confidence
somewhere along the way they've lost the
ability to focus on the things they are
great at and stacking those promises
they make to themselves and the way i
get them to break their slump is not
correcting their swing or getting them
positive it's getting them to
acknowledge the small promises showing
up to batting practice early hitting
that extra bucket of balls beginning to
reward themselves for the extra promises
they keep to themselves puts them back
in a state of self-confidence all of a
sudden they're hitting the ball great
again
it's really an interesting trick of the
mind and
like you i have this similar
sense of i want to be able to want it
for people yeah and the one thing in my
life that i am very grateful for is that
i know how to build desire i know how to
go down the process of wanting something
what what is that process for you of
desire because most
what i've found in this book
is here's the thing for most people and
i'm hoping that your process will attack
this what i've discovered that is
heartbreaking
is the average person
cannot celebrate themselves cannot i'm
going to ask everybody who's watching
this to tomorrow morning stand in front
of the mirror we're going to unpack this
whole thing and try to high five
yourself
and most really fast give people the the
science behind why that's meaningful so
i have this habit of every single
morning i stand in front of the mirror
and i take a moment and i raise my hand
and i give my reflection a high five and
there is so much science behind this so
instead of seeing yourself
right and have having this moment in the
mirror you know what the average person
does first of all we beat ourselves down
so i would look in the mirror for 40
some years and be like oh my god my
freaking jowls look like saddle
saddlebags on a goddamn horse going in
the grand canyon my eyes have a my neck
is only striped my boob one boobs
hanging lower than the other i look like
my gray hair like i start bringing
myself down
and when you start going down that road
with your reflection
then your thoughts go to i didn't get to
that email i forgot to text lisa back i
oh my gosh the dog still needs to be
walked i've got nine minutes for my
first zoom you're now
checking out
and that moment
in the mirror every morning
could be a profound moment
where you lift yourself up
and you check back in with your
intention
so the first piece of research and this
is recent from harvard business school
is that a simple moment
in the morning
where you set an intention
about who you're going to be today
impacts productivity
how you show up as a leader
it impacts your confidence it impacts
your mood all day long just that simple
moment of setting an intention so that's
research number one instead of
standing in front of the sink in your
bathroom and criticizing your appearance
or mindlessly going on autopilot
check back in and let's teach you to
make it a habit to lift yourself back up
you were you were chanting and that you
said that it opened something inside of
you and you felt connected to that
eternal spirit and you said you expected
it to fade away but for some reason that
one was just it was deeper and more
profound than you'd ever had before
is there a way to work towards that is
it the repetition of the mantras is it
belief in the words behind the mantras
is it being out in nature like how can
people
you know really
walk that path that you're talking about
our spiritual practice is like a
foundation
it's kind of like charging your cellular
phone
there's so many functions that a
cellular phone has these days
but you need to charge it for all of
them to be activated
so we may have so many functions in our
life
with our families with our occupation
with the world around us with our health
but you know in order for
them to be spiritually connected
we need that connection
and that's what our spiritual practice
is for and that's what being with
enlightening people helps us with
and that's prayer
meditation
in our meditation we chant this
beautiful mantra
and are you trying to clear your mind
when you meditate
are you trying to
soak in a certain feeling
remember that you're connected like if
you had to say in one sentence what the
purpose of
your particular meditation practice is
what is the the purpose
purification
excuse the example of the mind which you
just spoke
the mind is like a mirror
we're the self
and
we're seeing
the world and we're seeing ourselves
through the mirror of our mind
we all have the experience time that
when we're agitated nothing really looks
good anymore
and when we're in really good mood kind
of everything looks good yes when you're
in a good mood the trees look so sweet
and when you're in a very bad mood you
know you just couldn't care less about
the trees
so we're seeing ourself
as a reflection
through the mirror of the mind and we're
seeing the whole world in a similar way
the purpose of a mirror is to see
ourself
but when the mirror is covered by layers
and layers of dust and dirt and debris
that's all we see is that dust and dirt
and debris
what do i need to survive what do i
absolutely need
because the want changes every hour we
want pizza today tomorrow's pasta the
next week it's sushi
next day it's like we want onions with
tomatoes i mean you know like you're
driving yourself crazy with this one
thing the average person buys a car and
six months later i should have gotten a
blue one
why would i get a different color next
time yeah i feel the same i mean now in
my life i feel the same thing with
houses you get a house you go i don't
know school maybe a couple years i mean
i've been moving
so that want is never quite satisfied
because it's a fleeting thought that's
going on in your head and you just
you know it's also attached to
sensationalism which is king and queen
of america there's 80 million ads
everywhere you turn and look turn on tv
radio whatever
so you got to be able to turn that noise
off to get to what do i need
talk to me about that as a process how
do people actually do that especially
now as it's escalating it's getting
worse
and this is social media is the king of
it yeah
it's everywhere it's telling you who you
should date who you should marry it
tells you everything you should do
tom needs to grow like this
so how do we turn it down
well i think you have to be able to turn
off the noise you have to be in a
quiet place and you just got to really
get into yourself one of my big things
in life now
people actually have no idea who they
are
so if you don't know who you are and i
mean i know people 80 years old that
don't know who they are i know some 80
year old boys that still haven't turned
a corner to man so if you don't know who
you are how can you know how to navigate
your life so one of my other phrases in
life that i love now
this is your mission tom should you
choose you tom nobody else you choose
not your parents i didn't you choose to
accept it do you know who you are and
have you accepted that this is who i am
this is what i
need
most people don't even think about that
mental health is a huge priority in my
life and i encourage everyone to
prioritize it and one of the best ways
to follow through on healthy mental
health habits is by working with a
licensed therapist better help is
available for clients worldwide you can
log in to your account anytime and send
a message to your therapist betterhelp
is committed to facilitating great
therapeutic matches so they make it easy
and free to change therapists if needed
it's more affordable than traditional
offline therapy and financial aid is
available betterhelp wants you to start
living a happier life today visit
betterhelp.com
impact that's better h-e-l-p
and join the over one million people
taking charge of their mental health
with the help of an experienced
professional
and with a special offer for our impact
theory audience you can get 10 off your
first month at betterhelp.com
impact again that's betterhelp.com
impact take care and be legendary
your journey was very
movement oriented which i find
fascinating and as somebody who thinks
in movies there's a moment in forrest
gump where
he has to put himself to movement in
order to sort of clear his mind so in
the 60s you're
feeling deeply unsettled by what's going
on in with the vietnam war and instead
of just protesting you you begin to move
and you're traveling around you end up
in greece you have this tremendous
calling i think you said um and you
begin your journey to spiritual india
like there was there's so much movement
in all of that
is there something to that or is it just
getting out of
all the things that create the illusion
the second part
it's
it's passing through all these things
that create illusion
to a higher goal to a higher purpose
which is
living an enlightened life
and each of us
is an individual
um
my
destiny we could say was to hitchhike
from london to the himalayas
to try to find
a deep meaningful purpose in my life a
connection with
with spirituality with god
but i know people who don't go anywhere
and they get much more than me
[Laughter]
it's it's not a matter of where we go
it's a matter of
how we try to
change our own hearts
it's not a matter of changing the
environment it's changing myself
it's just a healthy habit to develop the
desire to challenge yourself in every
sense physically mentally emotionally um
you know one thing i
definitely started trying to do
um
especially recently given like the
political climate that's been going on
is i seek out
articles and news sources that i
disagree with
um
because i i see
the the bubbles that everybody's in and
the tribal lines that everybody's
drawing and i am
i'm horrified by it but i also want to
try my best to not succumb to that
myself and so
um
yeah i read sources i read books of
things i disagree with and and it's and
it changes me it it really does it it
softens me
um sometimes i'll finish the book and
i'm like well i still don't agree with
them but damn i respect them now like
that's a smart person
um
and so that that's one way i do it
intellectually uh but i think it's you
know that carries over
into all areas of life i mean it's as
simple as um
you know if you go to the gym it's like
challenge yourself to do something new
take a class that
you know like my wife just at the age of
37 decided she wanted to learn how to
swim and she's like mortified of it you
know
but i'm like hell yeah go do it you know
like that's
because it's not just about swimming
it's it's about just developing that
consistent habit of like
stepping into your discomfort
our parents
give us limitation based on their
limited psychology and their emotional
patterns that they learn from their
parents then we go to school and we're
taught to live in a box think in a box
dress like everyone else don't sing too
loudly don't dream too big don't be too
passionate and then our peers
do the same thing to us and then society
says oh genius is the realm of genetics
not everyday people which has been
dismissed by some very good science you
know i mean the ten thousand hour rule
that we all know from florida state
university professor anders erickson it
just confirms so much so
i do think we all want i think what's
happened is we've
as we've left who we truly are we've
contracted
and now it's all about staying safe in
the world versus going out there and
letting our brilliant our primal genius
shine and a lot of people just have
stuff that pain of disappointment and
their doubt really deep inside and they
just
are addicted to distraction and escapes
because they don't want to deal with
their potential that they've denied
let's say
something traumatic happens in your
childhood
that
that pain early on in your life causes a
lot of negative emotions and one of the
things that i talk about is that anytime
we feel an emotion it compels us to
to do what i call equalizing which is um
like if i'm angry at you i'm going to
continue to be angry at you until i
either
get you know retaliate or you apologize
like something needs to happen to make
that anger go away there needs to be
some sort of like equalization between
us
and if there is no equalization that
anger just kind of simmers and sits
there
forever and
one of the reasons why
childhood traumas are so debilitating
for people is that essentially these
extremely painful experiences occur
to our feeling brains
while our thinking brains are still
undeveloped and don't know how to
explain or create meaning around that
pain
so let's say something really painful
happened to me now i'd be like oh well
you know
he meant well and
you know happens or whatever but if
i'm like a five-year-old my explanation
for it only gets as far as like i'm a
bad i'm a bad boy i'm a bad person and
the world hates me you know like that's
and that will stick
um
because it doesn't get equalized and
it'll stick for the rest of my life and
the problem is is that we forget that
that painful thing happens so we just
kind of go through life
with this uh feeling of inferiority and
pain that lingers
that
we can't really put an explanation to or
explain away
and so the process of therapy is
basically
unraveling a lot of our
experiences until we get back to that
original experience and with our adult
thinking brain we can now put meaning to
that pain that is helpful to us
essentially